Manual for the Dyadic Parent-Child Interaction Coding System

INTRODUCTION
The Dyadic Parent-Child Interaction Coding System (DPICS) is a behavioral observation system designed to assess the quality of parent-child social interactions. We make a point of not referring to this third edition as

“DPICS-III,” to emphasize that the DPICS is a single, adaptable system for recording important parent and child behaviors that maintain particular parent-child interaction patterns associated with ineffective parenting styles and disruptive child behavior. It is not a fixed set of behavioral categories to be used inflexibly. The DPICS categories have undergone continuous refinement and psychometric study since the first published edition (Eyberg & Robinson, 1983; Robinson & Eyberg, 1981), and the system permits selection of categories that address the user’s specific purpose in observational recording. Investigators in our own laboratory and others have added promising new categories to the DPICS for study. Experimental categories that evidence psychometric strength and utility are retained and refined within the system. Psychometrically inadequate categories are deleted. This third edition replaces earlier editions. In this edition, we have moved promising categories still under study to the appendix, to underscore their distinction from the standard categories.
Since its original publication, clinicians and researchers have used this coding system to guide treatment and evaluate change in parent-child interaction therapy (PCIT) and other parent training interventions for young children with disruptive behavior. Forensic child psychologists and clinicians have used the DPICS to describe parenting abilities, parent-child attachment, and changes in parenting behaviors following interventions with abusive families. The DPICS has also been used to describe parent-child interactions of children with comorbid psychosocial and developmental disorders and to examine interactions between health-care providers and children during speech and physical therapies and educational tutoring. Researchers have adapted the DPICS to record adult-child interactions occurring in the home and classroom as well as clinic setting; to record parent-infant interactions; and to record interactions of parents with school-age children. Researchers continue to explore new situations and new categories of behavior as the DPICS develops.
The Format of this Manual
This manual contains three major sections. In the Introduction, we describe the development of the coding system, including the psychometric findings that guided category revision in this third edition, applications of the DPICS in the psychological literature, and general guidelines for coding parent-child interactions using the DPICS. In the main section of this manual we present the empirically established behavioral categories, with detailed coding guidelines for each category. In this second section, all parent codes are presented first, followed by child codes. The final section of this manual contains the appendices, which include supplemental parent and child categories, tables of standardization data for normative and clinical samples in the standard DPICS situations, and the data recording forms.
In the main section of this manual, each DPICS category is presented in a uniform format. First, the category is broadly defined with its essential elements. This definition is followed by a list of representative examples for quick reference. A list of decision rules is presented next for use when a coder is uncertain whether the category should be coded in a particular instance. Finally, the guidelines address specific characteristics of a behavior required to code it in the described category. Each guideline includes examples that illustrate the distinction being made.
To help locate categories quickly, several changes have been made to the manual. The Quick Reference Guide, at the front of this manual, lists all DPICS categories in the order they appear in this manual (that is, in priority rule order). In addition, the table of contents is formatted to demonstrate the organizational scheme. For electronic use of this manual, it is possible to go directly to the specific guidelines for a category by clicking on the category in the table of contents.
Overview of the DPICS
The DPICS categories serve as markers of parent-child relationship quality expressed through overt verbal and physical behaviors during social interactions that vary in the degree of control required by the parent. The child behaviors of interest in the DPICS are those that reflect social reciprocity and cooperation in dyadic interaction. The parent behaviors of interest are those that express reciprocity, nurturance, and parental control (antecedent and consequent behaviors that serve to increase or decrease child reciprocity and cooperative social behaviors). Thus, parent behaviors in the DPICS combine to represent parenting styles such as authoritative, authoritarian, and permissive styles as defined by Baumrind (Baumrind, 1967, 1991), and the child behaviors combine to represent degrees of optimal behavioral functioning in young children. Importantly, the DPICS is designed to capture children’s oppositional and defiant behaviors and the prosocial
behaviors incompatible with child disruptive behavior. It is not designed to assess child internalizing behaviors such as anxiety or depression.
The purposes of the DPICS are the same as described in earlier editions: (a) to provide an observational measure of parent and child behaviors during dyadic interactions as one component of the psychological evaluation of childhood disorders and/or parenting skills; (b) to measure baseline or pre-treatment behaviors occurring in dyadic family interactions; (c) to provide a measure of ongoing progress during therapy that focuses on changing general parent-child interaction patterns; and (d) to serve as a behavioral observation measure of treatment outcome.
The DPICS observations are conducted in three standard parent-child interaction situations (child-led play, parent-led play, clean-up), in which verbalization (e.g., Labeled Praise), vocalization (e.g., Whine), and physical behavior (e.g., Positive Touch) categories are coded for both child and parent. Although frequency is a key parameter for many of the individual behaviors coded in the DPICS, it is important to recognize that several of the behavior categories capture sequences of behavior. For example, the category Reflection, by definition, identifies a sequence of two similar verbalizations stated sequentially. Sequences are also identified by the Response categories, such as Compliance and Answer.
The DPICS categories presented in this manual have been standardized with children ages 3 through 6, and psychometric data from the major standardization studies are reported in this manual. The DPICS was originally designed for children ages 2 through 6, and children spanning this age range were included in the first standardization of the DPICS (Robinson & Eyberg, 1981). More recently, psychometric studies at Auburn University (Elizabeth Brestan, principal investigator) are examining the DPICS categories with older children (ages 7 to 12), and the final report is due shortly (Brestan, personal communication, October, 2004). Until those data are available, we encourage caution in interpreting data from parent-child dyads with older children. Further, the experimental categories introduced in the second edition of the DPICS have not been examined with 2-year-olds; for this age group in particular, the child verbalization categories should be piloted before use.
The normative data presented in this manual are limited to parent-child dyads with children in the 3- to 6- year-old age range. The clinic-referred children in the standardization studies presented in this manual met the following criteria: (a) diagnosis of Oppositional Defiant Disorder according to the DSM-IV; (b) standard score equivalent > 70 on the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test; (c) Standard score equivalent for parents > 70 on the Wonderlic Personnel Test; (d) no history of severe physical impairment, such as inabilities to see, hear, or walk; and (e) no history of severe mental impairment, such as autism spectrum disorders or psychosis. Dyads were not excluded for the presence of secondary comorbid diagnoses such as attention deficit hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), conduct disorder, anxiety disorders, or learning disabilities, nor for parent personality or mental disorders. Non-referred, “normative” comparison children in the psychometric studies met similar criteria but were screened for the absence of a disruptive behavior disorder and ADHD.
Reliability of the DPICS Categories
Reliability of Live Coding
Coding from videotape is relatively recent. In the original DPICS standardization study (Robinson & Eyberg, 1981), all categories were coded live. During development of the DPICS-II, Bessmer and Eyberg (1993) examined the categories (excluding the experimental reflexive categories) with live coding. A community sample of 20 mother-child dyads was recruited and observed in the Child-Led Play (CLP) and Parent-Led Play (PLP) situations. From these observations, three types of inter-observer reliability were calculated: (a) Pearson product moment correlations; (b) Percent agreement; and (c) Cohen’s kappa. These data, presented in Table 1 (Appendix C), show that the parent and child categories that occurred with sufficient frequency demonstrated adequate interrater reliability when coded live. The child categories Smart Talk, Yell, Whine, and Negative Touch did not occur with sufficient frequency to permit calculation of inter-observer reliability in this non- problem sample.
Reliability of Videotape Coding
Although videotaping interactions for later coding is time-consuming, it offers several advantages. The primary advantage is that a videotape may be paused and rewound to observe again a behavior that wasunclear initially. Videotaping interactions can also be advantageous when many behaviors have been selected for coding. It would be possible, for example, to code one set of behaviors (e.g., parent behaviors) during a first pass and then code remaining behaviors (e.g., child behaviors) during a second pass. Videotaped interactions are also more convenient for reliability checking, because the two observers do not need to watch the interaction at the same time. In addition, when using a computer coding program while viewing videotapes, codes may be entered with the time of occurrence, yielding more accurate records for subsequent sequential analysis of data.
Reliabilities for the third edition DPICS categories are drawn from the standardization studies conducted on all DPICS categories from the second edition. In the DPICS-II standardization study for mother-child dyads, Bessmer, Brestan, and Eyberg (2005) examined three types of inter-observer reliability (Pearson correlations, percent agreement, Cohen’s kappa) of videotape coding with 30 non-referred mother-child dyads and 30 mother-child dyads referred for treatment of oppositional defiant disorder (ODD). Table 2 (in Appendix C) shows the reliabilities for each category across all 60 children. Two categories, child Labeled Praise and Parent Yell, did not occur in this sample of problem and non-problem dyads. Focusing just on kappa reliability, results indicated adequate to strong inter-observer reliabilities for all DPICS-II categories that occurred except child Negative Touch (Cohen’s kappa < .40), which occurred infrequently.
Brestan, Foote, and Eyberg (2005) standardized the DPICS-II categories for father-child dyads using 60 new families of non-referred (n = 30) and referred children with ODD (n = 30). Intraclass correlations and kappa reliabilities established on 58% of the total sample are shown in Table 3 (Appendix C). Among the individual categories examined by Brestan et al. and included in this third revision of the DPICS, two parent categories (Whine, Yell) and one child category (Labeled Praise) had poor reliability (Cohen’s kappa < .40). The low reliabilities in this sample again occurred for categories with low frequency of occurrence.
We cross-validated the kappa reliability of all the DPICS-II individual categories and selected composite categories in a pretreatment sample of 89 children diagnosed with ODD and their parents. The sample included 42 father-child dyads and 89 mother-child dyads. Reliability was checked for 33% of the observations from each family. Combining data across the three DPICS situations, the two days of observation, and both the father- and mother-child dyads, the kappa estimates for the parent categories ranged from .38 to 1.00 and for the child categories from .29 to .88. The reliability estimates for each category are shown in Table 4 (Appendix C).
In addition to inter-observer reliability, the DPICS categories have demonstrated test-retest reliability. In a study examining 79 clinic-referred mother-child dyads in the PLP and CU situations, Brinkmeyer (2005) examined one-week test-retest reliability of parent Critical Statement, parent Praise, and child Negative Talk (defined as Smart Talk plus Critical Statements). She found that all three categories showed significant moderate stability in both situations (see Table 5).
Validity of the DPICS
Several studies demonstrated the validity of the categories of the original DPICS, and most of these categories have been retained in the subsequent editions of the DPICS. In the first standardization of the DPICS (Robinson & Eyberg, 1981), the discriminative validity of several individual categories was established. Specifically, referred children showed more Whines, Yells, and Noncompliance than nonreferred children, and parents of referred children gave more Critical Statements and Direct Commands to their children and asked fewer Descriptive Questions than parents of non-referred children.
Early parent-child interaction therapy outcome studies also demonstrated the treatment sensitivity of the DPICS categories (Eyberg & Matarazzo, 1980; Eyberg & Robinson, 1982). Specifically, Eyberg and Matarazzo found significant decreases in mothers’ Direct Commands, Indirect Commands, Descriptive Questions, and Critical Statements, and significant increases in Descriptive Statements, Labeled Praise, and Total Praise in CLP after treatment. In the PLP situation, they found significant decreases in mothers’ Indirect Commands and Descriptive Questions, and significant increases in Labeled Praise and Total Praise. Eyberg and Robinson found similar changes with treatment, as well as significant decreases in child Inappropriate Behavior (defined in that study as Whine, Cry, Negative Touch, Smart Talk, Yell, and Destructive ) and the Noncompliance Ratio (defined as the frequency of child Noncompliance divided by the frequency of commands that have opportunity for compliance (i.e., alpha commands). Since these early studies, discriminative validity and treatment sensitivity of the DPICS categories have been demonstrated many times. In the next section, we review the evidence of validity from the more recent studies examining the categories from the DPICS II.
Discriminative Validity
Discriminative validity refers to the degree to which a category distinguishes between two or more groups known to differ on the construct assessed by the system, as determined by an independent criterion (Kelley, Reitman, & Noell, 2003). The discriminative validity of the DPICS has been documented in several studies demonstrating discrimination between non-referred families and families referred for treatment of children with disruptive behavior disorders.
In a recent DPICS standardization study with father-child dyads (Brestan, Foote, & Eyberg, 2005), clinic- referred and non-referred families showed significant differences on three of six composite categories examined, including child Compliance Ratio, father Inappropriate Behavior, and father Prosocial Behavior. Specifically, the referred father-child dyads showed more father Inappropriate Behavior (Critical Statement + Smart Talk), less child Compliance (defined in this study as the ratio of child compliance to direct or indirect commands that presented an opportunity to comply and less father Prosocial Behavior (Acknowledgement + Behavior Descriptions + Labeled Praise + Laugh + Reflection + Positive Touch). No group differences were found in father Total Commands (Direct Commands + Indirect Commands), child Inappropriate Behavior (Critical Statement + Smart Talk + Whine + Yell), or child Prosocial Behavior (defined in this study as Acknowledgement + Answer + Behavior Description + Labeled Praise + Positive Touch + Unlabeled Praise).
A second standardization study, examining mother-child interactions (Bessmer, Brestan, & Eyberg, 2005), found significant differences in six of seven composite categories examined. Specifically, the referred mother- child dyads showed significantly less mother Prosocial Behavior (defined in this study as Acknowledgement + Behavioral Description + Information Description + Labeled Praise + Laugh + Positive Touch + Reflection + Unlabeled Praise) and child Compliance Ratio (defined as compliance to commands that presented an opportunity to comply), and a significantly higher mother Direct Command Ratio (Direct Command ÷ Total Commands) mother Total Commands (Direct Commands + Indirect Commands), mother Inappropriate Behavior (Destructive + Negative Touch + Yell + Whine + Smart Talk + Critical Statement), and child Inappropriate Behavior (Destructive + Negative Touch + Yell + Whine + Smart Talk + Critical Statement). The referred and non-referred families showed no differences in the frequency of child Prosocial Behavior (Acknowledgement + Behavioral Description + Information Description + Labeled Praise + Laugh + Positive Touch + Unlabeled Praise).
Convergent Validity
Convergent validity refers to the extent to which a category score correlates with other similar measures (Kelley et al., 2003), either because the two measures assess the same construct or because there is overlap between the constructs assessed by the two measures. Bessmer, Brestan, and Eyberg (2005) examined the convergent validity of several DPICS composite categories with parent rating scale measures. Specifically, seven DPICS composite categories (Inappropriate Behavior [parent and child], Prosocial Behavior [parent and child], child Compliance Ratio, parent Direct Command Ratio, and parent Total Commands) accounted for significant variance in the ECBI Intensity Scale scores (40%), Parenting Stress Index (PSI) Child Domain scores (22%), PSI Parent Domain scores (19%), and Parental Locus of Control scores (22%). As the authors noted, the construct measured by the ECBI Intensity Scale (child disruptive behavior) is the one most closely related to behaviors observed during mother-child observations with the DPICS.
Brestan, Foote, and Eyberg (2005) examined the convergent validity of several DPICS composite categories with father-child dyads. Notably, they found that fathers’ scores on the ECBI Intensity Scale were negatively correlated with child Compliance (defined as compliance to commands that provide opportunity to comply) and positively correlated with child Inappropriate Behavior (Critical Statements + Destructive + Negative Touch + Smart Talk + Whine + Yell + ) and father Inappropriate Behavior (Critical Statement + Destructive + Negative Touch + Smart Talk + Whine + Yell ). At the same time, ECBI Intensity Scale scores were not related to child Prosocial Behavior (Acknowledgement + Behavioral Description + Labeled Praise + Laugh + Positive Touch + Unlabeled Praise) with their fathers. Similarly, the PSI Child Domain scores were related as expected to the DPICS child composite categories of Compliance and Inappropriate Behavior among father- child dyads.
Webster-Stratton (1985b)found that scores on the ECBI Problem Scale, which measures how problematic the child’s disruptive behavior is to the parent, were positively correlated with child Deviance (defined as Whine, Cry, Negative Touch, Smart Talk, Yell, and Destructive) and child Noncompliance on the DPICS. Table 6 in Appendix C lists several additional studies that provide evidence of convergent validity.
Treatment Sensitivity
Sensitivity to treatment is a type of validity that refers to the ability of a measure to reflect change that occurs during treatment. (Note that the measure must also demonstrate stability, or the absence of change in the absence of treatment for treatment sensitivity to be an indicator of measurement validity).
Schuhmann et al. (Schuhmann, Foote, Eyberg, Boggs, & Algina, 1998) examined changes in the DPICS after parent-child interaction therapy (PCIT) with 64 families of children diagnosed with oppositional defiant disorder. This study used the DPICS-II to compare parent-child interactions of an immediate treatment (IT) group with a wait-list (WL) group. As expected, parents in the IT group showed a significantly higher praise ratio (praise ÷ total parent statements) after treatment than parents in the WL group. Parents in the IT group also gave less Critical Statement and more Behavioral Description after treatment than WL parents. Children in the IT group had a significantly higher compliance ratio after treatment than the WL children; child Compliance significantly increased for the IT group while remaining unchanged in the WL group.
Webster-Stratton and Hammond (1990) also used the DPICS to assess changes in parent-child interactions following parent-training. They found significant decreases in the frequency of Critical Statement and Negative Touch by both fathers and mothers in the programs as well as significant decreases in Child Deviance (defined in their study as Noncompliance, Whine, Cry, Negative Touch, Smart Talk, Yell, and Destructive).
Applications of the DPICS
Since its original development, the DPICS has been used to guide the course of treatment in parent-child interaction therapy and to evaluate changes following this treatment (e.g., (Eyberg & Matarazzo, 1980; Nixon, Sweeney, Erickson, & Touyz, 2003; Schuhmann et al., 1998). The DPICS has been used to measure treatment outcomes following other treatments for oppositional children as well. For example, Webster-Stratton (Webster-Stratton, 1994) evaluated changes in parent-child interactions following videotape-based parent- training, and found significant reductions in parent Critical Statement, and child Deviance (defined as Whine, Cry, Negative Touch, Smart Talk, Yell, Destructive, and Noncompliance) as well as an increase in parent Praise and parent Reflective Statements, similar to category changes following PCIT.
The DPICS has also been used to identify parent-child interaction patterns associated with significant child or family psychopathology, such as within neglectful (Aragona & Eyberg, 1981) or abusive families (Borrego Jr., Timmer, Urquiza, & Follette, 2004). For example, Borrego and colleagues used sequential analysis of selected DPICS-II categories to examine differences in the moment-to-moment verbal interactions of abusive versus nonabusive parents in the DPICS situations . Their study found that abusive parents were significantly more likely than non-abusive parents to respond negatively (e.g., Yell) within five seconds after child Noncompliance and were less likely than non-abusive parents to praise their child for Compliance.
Analyses of normal family interactions in the DPICS situations have also contributed to our understanding of family variables that affect child development. For example, Kniskern and colleagues (Kniskern, Robinson, & Mitchell, 1983) found that, in the presence of the child’s sibling, mothers engaged in less conversation, gave less Praise, and issued fewer Commands than when alone with one child. Another study (Zangwill & Kniskern, 1982) found a high correlation between behavior in the clinic and behavior in the home for the child’s rate of Compliance and the parent’s rate of punishment (Critical Statements + Physical Negative) and reinforcement (Physical Positive + Unlabeled Praise + Labeled Praise).
Finally, applications of the DPICS to new dyadic populations, such as teacher-child interactions (McIntosh, Rizza, & Bliss, 2000) or the parent-child interactions of school-age children (Deskins et al., 2004, November) are extending our knowledge of interaction effects to broader areas of social interaction as they affect child behavior and development.
Adapting the DPICS for New Applications
One common clinical use of the DPICS is to guide parent-child interaction therapy (PCIT) sessions and to determine movement from one phase of therapy to the next (see Herschell, Calzada, Eyberg, & McNeil, 2002a, 2002b for a description of the use of DPICS in PCIT). The DPICS may be adapted to other treatment programs for children and their parents for similar purposes. The DPICS provides a simple method for observing and recording a 5-minute sample of parent-child interaction at the beginning of a treatment sessions to obtain quickly the information needed about progress on parenting skills taught in treatment and changes in the child’s behavior. The DPICS categories most often used in this way include the parent verbalization categories that represent positive attention (e.g., Behavioral Description, Reflective Statement), clear direction (e.g., Direct Commands), appropriate responses following compliance (e.g., Labeled Praise), and the child response categories following commands (e.g., Compliance, Noncompliance). The DPICS categories provide detailed information without requiring elaborate recording equipment, auxiliary coders, or lengthy observation periods.
As a measure of the quality of the parent-child relationship, the DPICS is designed to allow adaptations to new situations. The three standard DPICS situations (CLP, PLP, and CU) have been used in the standardization studies. However, other situations have been used effectively for certain populations or research questions. For example, a “parent teaching child” situation, a “forbidden toy” situation, and a “no interrupting” situation (in which a parent is asked to fill out a questionnaire silently and tell the child not to interrupt) have been reported. In addition, the DPICS can be adapted for use in settings other than the laboratory or clinic, such as observations in the child’s school or home. For instance, Webster-Stratton (1985b) successfully used the DPICS to assess parent-child interactions in the child’s living room.
The DPICS Categories
Evolution of the Categories
The first edition of the DPICS (Eyberg & Robinson, 1983) included categories to record the behaviors of young children and their parents during parent-child interactions. The child categories included observable disruptive behaviors and noncompliance, and the parent categories included parenting behaviors representing both (a) harsh parenting, giving negative attention and ineffective direction to the child; and (b) nurturant parenting, giving positive attention, clear guidance, and positive reinforcement to the child.
The second edition, called DPICS-II (Eyberg, Bessmer, Newcomb, Edwards, & Robinson, 1994)removed categories from the first version found to have low inter-observer reliability and expanded the DPICS to include experimental categories to be studied. One new set of categories resulted from separating certain existing categories into more discrete categories to isolate the important elements in the interaction contributing to child behavior change. For example, the category Descriptive Statements was separated into Behavioral Descriptions and Information Descriptions, and the category Descriptive/Reflective Questions was redefined to separate out the category Information Questions.
The second group of new categories in the DPICS-II were the “reflexive” categories (i.e., parent categories were examined as child categories, and child categories were examined as parent categories). The reflexive categories were considered important for the examination of reciprocity in parent-child interactions. Exploratory studies had identified differences in the verbal behaviors of disruptive and non-disruptive children (Forster, Eyberg, & Burns, 1990) as well as promising changes in child verbal behaviors during treatment (Mee, 1991). Conversely, the marital literature had identified negative adult interactive behaviors similar to the child categories in the first edition of the DPICS (e.g., yell, whine) that discriminated effective from ineffective partner interactions (Weiss & Heyman, 1990). Changes in these affective adult categories and in child verbal behaviors during treatment had not been studied in the parent-child treatment literature. Relations between these variables and other indicators of parent-child attachment were also unexamined, prompting us to include them in the DPICS-II for further study. The categories in the second edition permitted exploration of many hypothesized treatment effects. Development of this third edition of the DPICS is based on extensive psychometric examination of the experimental categories included in the DPICS-II (Bessmer et al., 2005; Boggs, Nelson, & Eyberg, 2005; Brestan et al., 2005; Werba et al., 2001).
Categories were evaluated on four criteria: (a) adequate interrater reliability (kappa); (b) frequency of occurrence; (c) sensitivity to change during parent-child interaction therapy (PCIT); and (d) ability to discriminate the interactions of different types of adult-child dyads (e.g., children with disruptive behavior disorders from those of control children, abusive mothers from non-abusive mothers).
The parent categories of Contingent Praise, Warning, Laugh, Whine, Yell, and Destructive were removed from the coding system because they occurred too infrequently for meaningful analysis of interrater reliability. The child Destructive category was removed from the DPICS because accumulated evidence suggested that it could not be coded reliably. Play Talk (parent and child) was moved to the supplemental categories, in Appendix B, because although it can be coded reliably, evidence of discriminative validity has been inconsistent. Finally, the parent response categories (Answer, Compliance, No Answer, Noncompliance, No Opportunity for Answer, and No Opportunity for Compliance) were designated supplemental categories because, although they also can be coded reliably, researchers have not developed and tested hypotheses about these behaviors. Thus, these categories may have limited conceptual relevance for children with disruptive behavior.
Tables 7 and 8 (Appendix C) summarize the Kappa reliabilities and validity evidence for all DPICS categories that were included in the second edition. Frequency of occurrence data for the DPICS categories, which affect reliability, are provided in Tables 9 and 10 (Appendix C).
The New Categories
To make this third edition of the DPICS easier and more efficient to use, some individual categories were combined into broader individual categories. Among the parent verbalization categories, criteria for combining two categories into one included the following: (a) inter-rater reliability of each individual category was adequate; (b) confusion matrices suggested the two categories were difficult for coders to distinguish; and (c) most research using the two categories combined them (alone or with additional categories) after coding, either for analysis or presentation. As a result of these deliberations, the parent categories Smart Talk and Critical Statement were combined into one category, Parent Negative Talk (NTA). In addition, Parent Acknowledgement (AK) and Parent Information Description (ID) were combined into one category, Parent Neutral Talk (TA). The coding guidelines provide detailed information for coding these new categories.
Child verbalization categories, introduced as experimental categories in the second edition, were also combined into broader individual categories. All child verbalizations were collapsed into four categories (Prosocial Talk, Negative Talk, Command, and Question) to retain a measure of the reciprocal nature of the verbal interaction while simplifying the categories for coding. All child verbalizations that contribute positively to the dyadic interaction without leading the interaction (Acknowledgement, Behavioral Descriptions, Information Descriptions, Labeled Praise, Reflection, and Unlabeled Praise) were combined into one Prosocial Talk (PRO) category. Smart Talk and Critical Statements were combined into one Negative Talk (NTA) category, corresponding to the parent codes. Direct Commands and Indirect Commands were combined into a single Command (CM) category, and Descriptive Questions and Information Questions were combined into a more general Question (QU) category. Of note, the categories that were combined are not identical for parents and children because the verbalizations of clinical and experimental interest for parents and children differ. The new individual DPICS categories, along with the categories they replace, are shown in Table 11 (Appendix C). The specific coding guidelines, in the next major section of this manual, provide more information about coding these categories.
Composite Categories
Composite categories are created by combining two or more individual categories into a single category representing a more general construct. The individual categories within a composite category are often coded separately and combined later for analysis or reporting. For example, in reporting results, we often combine the categories Unlabeled Praise and Labeled Praise into the more general composite category Praise. 
Psychometric analyses of specific individual categories of behavior provide important information about which behaviors can be usefully added or deleted from a composite category to strengthen the meaningfulness of the composite category. For example, if a frequently occurring individual category did not distinguish referred from nonreferred dyads, it would not be useful in a composite category intended to distinguish these groups.
On the other hand, in some samples the individual categories may occur too infrequently for statistical analysis. In this case, combining these categories into a larger, composite category, will increase the frequency of the composite category and may increase the power to detect meaningful differences. In these cases, it can be advantageous to code the behaviors into the composite category at the outset. For example, if you were interested in measuring parent Positive Attending in CLP, rather than coding Behavioral Descriptions, Reflections, Labeled Praise, and Unlabeled Praise each separately and later combining them into a single composite category, it would be more efficient (easier and faster to code accurately) to code them as a single category (Positive Attending) in the first place. One potential disadvantage to coding a composite category is that if the composite category does not demonstrate adequate reliability or sensitivity for your purpose, it is not then possible to decompose the category to understand the problem or to salvage component categories that might have adequately provided important information. Some commonly reported DPICS composite categories are listed in Tables 12 and 13 (Appendix C).
How to Conduct the DPICS Observations
The Setting
The DPICS observations are typically conducted in a playroom equipped with a table, two chairs, a time-out chair (placed in the corner of the room facing the wall), and five sets of toys. The toys are taken out of their containers, with two sets placed on the table and the remaining toy sets scattered on the floor near the remaining corners of the room. Parent-child dyads are typically observed and coded from behind a one-way mirror, using a bug-in-the-ear communication device to present the directions to the parent. During evaluation sessions involving two parents, the parents do not observe one another to prevent observation by the second parent from influencing their play with the child. [Observations during treatment are typically observed (and selected categories coded) by the second parent to increase parent skill acquisition.]
If a bug-in-the-ear device is not available, the observer may explain the situations that will be observed (described below) to the parents in advance, and then briefly enter the playroom before each new situation to remind the parent quietly of the directions. If observation room facilities are not available, the observer may code from within the playroom, sitting out of the child’s direct line of vision. If interactions are recorded from outside the playroom, the child’s behavior may be more typical of interactions at home when parent and child are not in the presence of a stranger. Although the information needed from an observation of parent-child interaction may still be useful, clinical judgment must be used in interpreting the findings based on normative data collected from interactions of parent and child alone in the playroom. The DPICS categories and situations may also be adapted for use in home observations of parent-child interaction. Similar cautions apply in these situations.
The Three Situations
The DPICS is used to code the behaviors of the parent and child in three standard situations that vary in the degree of parental control or directiveness. In this third edition, we have revised the names of the three situations to distinguish them from the phases of parent-child interaction therapy, which were previously given the same name. The first DPICS situation is called Child Led Play (CLP). In this situation, the parent is instructed to allow the child to choose any activity and to play along with the child. In the second situation, Parent Led Play (PLP), the parent is instructed to select any activity and to get the child to play along with the parent according to the parent's rules. In the third situation, Clean-up (CU), the parent is instructed to tell the child to clean up all the toys in the room without assistance. In each situation, the behavior categories are coded continuously for 5 minutes, and yield a total frequency of each behavior per 5-minute situation. For pre- and post-treatment assessment purposes, coding begins after a 5-minute “warm-up” period for both CLP and PLP. Thus, the DPICS observations require a total of 25 minutes per parent to complete (i.e., 10 minutes of CLP, 10 minutes of PLP, and 5 minutes of CU). Before treatment begins, these observations are conducted twice, usually one week apart, to increase the stability of the baseline scores.
Instructions for the Three Standard Situations
The directions are typically presented to the parent over a “bug-in-the-ear” microphone device from an observation room. In this way, the child hears the initial directions from the parent rather than from the therapist.
1) Child-Led Play
“In this situation tell __________ that he/she may play with whatever he/she chooses. Let him/her choose any activity he/she wishes. You just follow his/her lead and play along with him/her.”
After the 5-minute warm-up period, the parent is told:
“You're doing a nice job of letting __________ lead the play. Please continue to let him/her lead.”
2) Parent-Led Play
“That was fine. Please do not clean up the toys at this time. Now we'll switch to the second situation. Tell __________ that it is your turn to choose the game. You may choose any activity. Keep him/her playing with you according to your rules.”
After the 5-minute PLP warm-up period, the parent is told:
“You're doing a nice job of leading the play. Please continue to get __________ to play along with you according to your rules.”
3) Clean-Up
“That was fine. Now please tell __________ that it is time to leave the playroom and the toys must be put away. Make sure you have him/her put the toys away by him/herself. Have him/her put all the toys in their containers and all the containers in the toy box.”
The Toys
Table 14 (Appendix C) lists the kinds of toys that are and are not appropriate for use in DPICS observations. Appropriate toys are ones that encourage creativity and constructive play, such as building blocks, drawing materials, and toy animals. Inappropriate toys are ones that lead to noisy or aggressive behavior, are messy or difficult to clean up, elicit stereotyped responses, discourage conversation, or lead the parent or child to pretend they are a character in the play other than themselves. Board games with pre-set rules are also inappropriate during observation of the Child Led Play because it may be difficult to ignore rule-breaking and continue with a game. When the DPICS is used to measure treatment outcome, we recommend that the same toys be used during the pre- and post-treatment observations and that different toys be used during treatment sessions. Five different toy sets should be available in the playroom during the formal assessment sessions. This helps to ensure that an age-appropriate, appealing toy is available to the child, that the child will not become bored with the toys during the observation period, and that there will be enough toys to last throughout the 5-minute observation of Clean-up.
Coding the Observations
The observations of the dyadic interactions can be recorded either “live” or from videotapes of the interactions. Live coding is typically used during treatment sessions and general clinical assessment, and videotaped coding is typically used for research assessments. The continuous recording of behaviors during a 5-minute observation period contributes to the validity and utility of the DPICS by providing a complete account of the behaviors and permitting data to be collected in less time than is typically required by interval sampling methods. However, interval sampling of the DPICS has been used reliably (Bessmer & Eyberg, 1993, November). The full set of DPICS categories may be coded, or only a subset, depending on the purpose of the parent-child assessment. Similarly, to measure a specific target behavior not currently in the system, the new behavior can be added to the recording sheet or computer-coding program.
For live coding with the DPICS, several coding sheets have been developed for different purposes. During parent-child interaction therapy, where a 5-minute situation is typically coded at the start of each session to provide immediate information to guide the session, shortened versions have been developed that focus specifically on parenting skills or child behaviors targeted for change (see Parent-Child Interaction Therapy Session Integrity Checklists and Materials on the PCIT website for examples). These coding sheets also contain sections for rating qualitative aspects of the interaction immediately following the 5-minute coding interval.
Figures 1 and 2 (on the following pages) are examples of coding sheets that contain all of the individual DPICS categories. These sheets are most commonly used in research to measure pre-treatment and post- treatment interactions for analyses of treatment change. They are also useful in general psychological assessment of parent-child behavior when access to data are needed rapidly and video-computer recording is not practical. Figure 1 shows a coding sheet for continuous recording during the 5-minute observation. With this sheet, the observer uses a stopwatch to time the 5-minute coding interval, and codes the behaviors by placing a tally mark in the appropriate space reserved for each behavior each time the behavior occurs.
In addition to continuous recording, the DPICS behaviors can be recorded sequentially for later sequential analysis of the data. Figure 2 illustrates a sequential data recording sheet. With sequential coding, the observer records the behaviors of interest in the order in which they occur. The recording sheet contains columns that each represent a 10 second interval. The interval columns are further divided into five sub-columns that allow the observer to record up to 5 behaviors in each 10-sec. interval by placing a tally mark in the row representing the appropriate category and the sub-column representing the next occurrence of any behavior within that10 sec. interval. Each recording sheet captures 60-seconds of behavior interaction. In most instances, sequential coding of DPICS permits a break from coding (e.g., 30 sec) between sheets, which may increase reliability in some cases, although it also adds time to the total assessment. Sequential coding is also technically more complex in that it requires coders to listen to pre-recorded “beeps” that cue movement from one interval to the next during the observation.
When coding from videotape, data for any or all categories may be computer-recorded using a software program developed specifically for this third version of DPICS. In addition to permitting analyses of frequencies and sequences of coded behaviors, the program provides a record of the precise time that each behavior is coded. When a second coder recodes the same observation session for purposes of reliability assessment, the program is able to calculate a variety of reliability estimates, including Cohen’s kappa. Along with the kappa estimates, the program produces the confusion matrices for each class of behavior (i.e., verbalization, vocalization, physical behavior, response behavior), which show how often a category was coded by the two coders at the same time and also how often a different category within the same class was coded at that time by the reliability coder - and which other specific category it was that was coded. By pinpointing which categories have been confused with one another, confusion matrices help coders to maintain reliable coding over time.

Basic Coding Rules
The Four Classes of Behavior
Certain basic coding rules apply to all categories coded in the DPICS (see below and Appendix A), and some rules refer to categories within specific classes of behavior. The DPICS categories are grouped into four distinct classes of behavior, including: (a) Verbalizations (e.g., Direct Command, Labeled Praise, Neutral Talk), which describe the content of the verbal behavior; (b) Vocalizations (Whine, Yell) which describe the tone of the verbal behavior; (c) Physical behaviors (Positive Touch, Negative Touch); and (d) Response behaviors (e.g., Compliance to Command, No Opportunity to Comply, Answer to Question, No Answer) which describe important sequences in the parent-child interaction.
The Priority Order
When a behavior contains elements of more than one category within a class of behavior, only one category is coded. For example, the sentence “Isn’t that pretty snowflake you drew!” has elements of two categories in the verbalization class: a Descriptive/Reflective Question and a Labeled Praise. A Priority Order has been established (shown in Table 15, Appendix C) that lists the categories for each class in the order of their importance to the quality of the parent-child interaction. Thus, in the example given, the priority order indicates that praise takes precedence over questions. Therefore, this verbalization is coded only as a Labeled Praise.
Decision Rules
There will be times when a coder is not sure which category in a class should be coded. Using the hypothetical sentence, “Isn’t that a brightlight snowflake you drew,” if you were unsure if “brightlight” is positive or neutral, you might be unsure if the sentence is a praise or a question. When a coder cannot decide between two categories, the manual has Decision Rules to guide the choice. The decision rules list the categories in exactly reverse order from the priority order (see Table 15, Appendix C). That is, when in doubt between two categories, the decision rules guide the coder to select the category that is least important to the quality of the parent-child interaction. The decision rules are intended to prevent over-coding of important behaviors when there is doubt. At the same time, they are intended to help prevent the coding of neither category when in doubt, so that the overall rate of behavior during the interaction is not underestimated.
Note that when a behavior contains elements of two categories in different classes of behavior, such as a yelled criticism, both elements (e.g., both the Yell and the Critical Statement) are coded. Similarly, if two behaviors from different classes occur simultaneously, such as child compliance and a child verbalization, both behaviors are coded.
The Complete Thought Rule
One unit of behavior is defined by a complete thought, which is often expressed in a sentence, and is considered one behavior. In conversation, however, people do not speak in complete, grammatically correct sentences. Rather, they may name a series of objects or say short phrases. Sentence fragments that do not contain independent meaning are not considered complete thoughts and, consequently, are not coded as separate verbalizations. However, if an initial sentence fragment (e.g., “This is a...”) is completed (that is, the thought is finished) after a pause of any length, the entire sentence is coded as one verbalization as long as there has been no intervening verbalization during the pause.
The Two-Second Rule
When it is unclear whether a verbalization is a separate, complete, meaningful thought or is part of a verbalization occurring immediately before or after it, the coder may apply the two-second rule. This rule states that when there is a pause of two or more seconds between verbalizations, the observer codes the verbalizations separately. When it is clear that two verbalizations constitute separate, meaningful thoughts, a two-second pause is not necessary for coding the verbalizations separately.
Talking to Oneself
Verbalizations must be directed to the other person in the parent-child dyad to be coded. If the speaker is clearly speaking to him or herself, to a person not in the room (e.g., an observer behind a one-way mirror, the
verbalization is not coded. If it is unclear whether the verbalization is directed to the other person, code the verbalization as if is directed to the other person. Note: If using the supplemental category “Play Talk,” speaking to inanimate objects may be coded. Please see Appendix B for guidelines for coding “Play Talk.” If not using the supplemental Play Talk categories, verbalizations directed to one’s own toy are not coded. However, speaking to the toy of the other is coded as if the verbalization were directed to the other person. See Appendix A for additional guidelines for verbalizations that are not coded.
Coding Yes and No
Because of their unique uses in language and interactions, the words “yes” and “no” are coded independently (as Neutral Talk, Negative Talk, or Unlabeled Praise) whether they occur alone or at the beginning of a sentence. The remainder of the sentence, if any, is then coded in its appropriate category.
Superfluous phrases
Words that have no distinct meaning other than to introduce the sentence, such as the superfluous phrases “I see,” “I guess,” “Now,” and “I said,” are ignored and are not coded separately. For example, if a parent said “I guess you are drawing a big bird,” one Behavioral Description would be coded. If the child asked, “What did you say,” and the parent repeated, “I said now you are drawing a big bird” again only one Behavioral Description would be coded.

PARENT CATEGORIES

NEGATIVE TALK (NTA)
Definition
Negative talk is a verbal expression of disapproval of the child or the child's attributes, activities, products, or choices. Negative talk also includes sassy, sarcastic, rude, or impudent speech.

Decision rules
1. When uncertain as to whether a statement is coded a Negative Talk or a lower priority category such as a Neutral Talk, Reflective Statement, question, or command, do not code Negative Talk.
2. When uncertain as to whether a comment is Negative Talk or a neutral remark, do not code Negative Talk.

Parent NTA Guidelines
1. A comment that contains a negatively evaluative word(s) referring to an action, product, attribute, or choice of the child is a Negative Talk.
2. Negative talk does not need an explicitly stated negatively evaluative word if it is clear from the context that it is a negative evaluation.
3. Ingenuine questions that specify or imply a negative evaluation of the attributes, activities, or products of the child are Negative Talk.
4. Negative talk may express an unacceptable level or degree of an attribute, activity, product, or choice of the child.
5. A description that corrects the child's behavior by pointing out what the child has done wrong is Negative Talk, even if delivered in honeyed or playful tones.
6. Statements that directly tell the child that what the child has said is wrong are Negative Talk unless the parent is contradicting a negative child self-evaluation.
a. Statements that “correct” the child's preceding statement are Negative Talk only if they directly negate the child's words. Statements that simply provide correct information without directly negating the child or the child's words are not Negative Talk.
b. When a parent uses the word “No” or its synonyms to indicate that a preceding statement by the child is incorrect, the word “No” or its synonyms is coded as an independent Negative Talk. Any subsequent verbalization is coded separately.
c. If a parent “corrects” a child's statement of negative self-evaluation by using the word “no” or its synonyms or by stating any direct negation of the child's statement, the parent's correction is not coded Negative Talk.
7. When the word “No” or its synonyms provides a negative appraisal of the child in response to a child's self-evaluative question or statement, code Negative Talk.
8. When the word “No” or its synonyms is used to indicate that the child must not start or continue a behavior, it is coded as an independent Negative Talk.
9. When the child expresses a wish and the parent responds to the child's verbalization with “No” or its synonyms, the “No” is Neutral Talk not Negative Talk.
10. A statement that directly instructs the child not to perform some behavior that the child is engaged in, has just started, or has just completed, is a Negative Talk.
11. Statements indicating that the child should not engage in behavior that the child is beginning, engaging in, or has just completed (e.g., “You can't...”, or “You are not allowed to......... You are not going to...”) are Negative Talk. When such statements describe general rules for child behavior that do not relate to ongoing or immediately completed (< 5 sec.) behavior, code Neutral Talk.
12. A verbalization that expresses disapproval of both the child and the parent, and/or their shared attributes, activities, products, or choices, is coded as Negative Talk.
13. A parent verbalization containing self-criticism is not coded as a Negative Talk.
14. The same single critical word repeated with no pause is coded as one Negative Talk.
15. When a critical statement contains two or more verb phrases describing the same behavior, only one Negative Talk is coded.
16. Commands stated in the form of general rules for appropriate behavior are Negative Talk only when they serve to point out what is wrong about the child's ongoing or immediately completed behavior.
17. A statement that negatively evaluates or finds fault with objects in the environment not owned or created by the child is not Negative Talk.
18. Some conditional statements are Negative Talks. A conditional statement can be a Negative Talk only when the statement refers to an ongoing behavior of the child. If the statement refers to a behavior in which the child is not currently engaged, the statement is not considered a Negative Talk. See additional general guidelines for coding conditional statements in Appendix A.
a. If a conditional statement refers to the natural consequences for discontinuing a behavior the child is doing, just starting to do, or has just done, the statement is coded Negative Talk, not Neutral Talk.
b. If a conditional statement refers to a behavior the child is doing, just starting to do, or has just done, and the statement implies a conventional parent-imposed negative consequence for continuing the behavior, the statement is coded Negative Talk, not Neutral Talk.
c. If a conditional statement refers to a behavior the child is doing, is just starting to do, or has just done, and the statement implies a contingent reward from the parent for discontinuing the behavior, the statement is coded Negative Talk, not Neutral Talk.
d. In all conditional statements, when there are elements of more than one DPICS category, the priority order for coding categories is used.
19. Statements made in a sassy or sarcastic tone of voice are coded Negative Talk.
20. Sassy content, even without sassy tone, is coded Negative Talk.
21. Name-calling, by equating the child, other people, or any thing with a negatively evaluative word, is Negative Talk.
22. Comments containing swearing or profanity are Negative Talk.
23. Parental verbalizations, including conditional statements, that contain a nonspecific or unconventional parent-imposed negative consequence, are coded as Negative Talk.
24. When a parent responds to a child's command by saying “No” (or exact synonyms) and for 2 seconds issues no additional verbalizations, the “No” is a flat refusal and is coded as a Negative Talk, regardless of the parent's subsequent compliance. When a parent's “No” is followed by any other verbalization, even a counter-command, in less than 2 seconds, it is a Neutral Talk.
25. Negative Talk can occur simultaneously with behaviors in any non-verbalization category (e.g., vocalizations, physical behaviors, and responses following questions).

COMMANDS
Commands are statements in which the speaker (parent or child) directs the vocal or motor behavior of the other. Commands may be direct or indirect in form.

DIRECT COMMANDS (DC)
Definition
Direct commands are declarative statements that contain an order or direction for a vocal or motor behavior to be performed and indicate that the child is to perform this behavior.

Decision rules
1. When uncertain whether the verbalization is coded Command, or Negative Talk, code Command.
2. When uncertain whether the verbalization is coded Indirect Command or Direct Command, code Indirect Command.
3. When uncertain whether the verbalization is coded Command or a lower priority category (e.g., Neutral Talk, Description, Praise), code the lower priority category.

Parent DC Guidelines
1. Direct commands are always declarative statements. Commands in question form are always Indirect Commands.
2. Direct (and indirect) commands are always worded positively. They tell the child what to do. Statements that tell the child what not to do are Negative Talk.
3. Direct commands always contain the imperative verb, where the subject of the sentence is an implied “you.” The Direct Command may begin with the word “you” or its synonyms, or other words that do not change the meaning of the imperative verb.
4. When the subject of the sentence is not “you,” the sentence cannot be coded as a Direct Command. When the parent and child are both the subjects of the command (e.g., “let's...” and “we're”), the sentence is coded Indirect Command. When the sentence does not indicate who is to perform the behavior (i.e., the subject is “it”), the sentence is coded Neutral Talk.
5. Direct commands contain a verb phrase (often in imperative form) that indicates a vocal or motor behavior to be performed. Some parental statements may implicitly direct the child by providing information; however, code Command only when the statement contains a verb phrase calling for a vocal or motor behavior to be performed by the child.
6. The verb phrase in a Direct Command may be modified by words that imply that compliance is a necessity, such as “must,” “should,” “have to,” “got to,” “need to,” “supposed to,” and “ought to.” When the modifiers of the verb phrase in a command do not indicate the necessity of compliance, (such as might, may, could, can, and their synonyms), code Indirect Command.
7. When Direct Commands are preceded by phrases such as “I said... “I know...” “I'm sure...” and their synonyms that do not imply that compliance is optional, they remain Direct Commands. When preceding phrases imply that compliance is not a necessity such as “I think...” “I guess...” and their synonyms, code Indirect Command.
8. The sentence structure of the command determines whether it is coded Direct Command or Indirect Command, regardless of the specificity of the requested behavior.
9. Verb phrases calling for unobservable internal behaviors, when stated in imperative form, are coded Direct Commands (note: see Parent No Opportunity for Compliance).
10. Direct commands include commands for behavior to occur in the future (> 5-seconds). (Note: see Child No Opportunity for Compliance).
11. Statements beginning with “You are going to...” are coded as Direct Commands when they contain a specific suggestion for a vocal or motor behavior to be performed by the child and the behavior has not already been initiated by the child.
12. If the parent begins to give an Indirect Command but changes it to a Direct Command, code Direct Command.
13. The same single word command repeated without a 2 second pause is coded as one command.
14. When the child asks for guidance, the parent's response is coded Direct Command only when it contains a verb phrase indicating a vocal or motor behavior to be performed by the child.
15. Direct commands can contain a specific, conventional, parent-imposed discipline technique as a consequence. If the parent-imposed consequence is a nonspecific or unconventional negative consequence, the statement is coded Negative Talk.
16. In sentences containing two or more verbs in imperative form that are joined by “and,” where one verb phrase does not contain independent meaning, only one command is coded.

INDIRECT COMMANDS (IC)
Definition
An Indirect Command is a suggestion for a vocal or motor behavior to be performed that is implied or stated in question form.

Decision rules
1. When uncertain as to whether the command is direct or indirect, code Indirect Command.
2. When uncertain whether a sentence is an Indirect Command or a question, code the appropriate question category.
3. When uncertain whether the command is a Critical Statement or an Indirect Command, code Indirect Command.
4. When uncertain whether a sentence is an Indirect Command or Neutral Talk, code Neutral Talk.

Parent IC Guidelines
1. A question is an Indirect Command when it contains a suggestion for a vocal or motor behavior to be performed by the child. Questions tags added to the end of a Direct Command make it an Indirect Command.
2. Indirect Commands suggest a specific vocal or motor response to be performed by the child, whereas Descriptive/Reflective Questions request no more than a verbal Neutral Talk.
3. Indirect (and direct) commands are always worded positively. They tell the child what to do. Statements that tell the child what not to do are Negative Talk (NTA).
4. The subject of an Indirect Command is a stated or implicit “you” indicating that the child is to perform the behavior. The generic use of “you” meaning “one” or “people” when providing information should not be confused with the “you” referring to a child in a command.
5. A positively-worded statement that describes a rule about appropriate behavior in general, but does not imply that the child's ongoing or just-completed behavior should be performed differently in the future, is Neutral Talk not an Indirect Command.
6. When the subject of a command is not “you”, it cannot be coded as a Direct Command. When the subject is “we” or its synonyms, the command is an Indirect Command. When the subject is “it”, the sentence is Neutral Talk.
7. If a parent repeats a child's command to engage in a joint activity, it is an Indirect Command rather than a reflection.
8. Many parent verbalizations implicitly call for a child response; however, commands are coded only when the parent's verbalization contains an imperative verb phrase calling for a verbal or motor behavior to be performed by the child.
a. Indirect Commands in question form may be distinguished from Information Questions by the presence of an action verb phrase.
b. Indirect Commands in declarative form may be distinguished from Neutral Talks by the presence of an action verb phrase.
9. A parental statement of feeling, expectation, or preference is an Indirect Command when it clearly calls for the child to complete an action.
10. When Direct Commands are preceded by phrases such as “I think,” “I guess” and synonymous phrases that imply compliance is optional, the commands become indirect.
11. A statement beginning with “You can...” “You might...” “You could,” “You get to...” or “You may...” is an Indirect Command if the child has not already engaged in the behavior unless it is granting an immediately preceding request. If the statement follows a child's request to do something else, it is an Indirect Command.
12. Sentences beginning with “Can you...” are coded as Indirect Commands regardless of other possible intended meanings because of difficulty distinguishing among meanings in most cases.
13. Commands that call for internal or unobservable behavior in question form are coded Indirect Commands (See Child No Opportunity for Compliance).
14. Suggestions for behavior to occur in the future (> 5 sec.) are Indirect Commands (see Child No
Opportunity for Compliance).
15. The child's name or synonyms for it, whether in statement or question form, serve as “bid for attention” words (words that indirectly communicate “pay attention” or “listen to me”). When a parent uses a “bid for attention” word as the introductory or concluding word of a verbalization (separated by < 2 sec.) it is not coded separately. When a “bid for attention” word is separated from another parent verbalization by 2 seconds or longer, or by an intervening child verbalization, it is coded separately as an Indirect Command with No Opportunity for Compliance.
NOTE: Other “bid for attention” words include “hey you,” “you hoo,” “sweetie,” “baby,” “dear,” etc. The word “please” is often used as a bid for attention word.
Words such as “carefully” or “quiet,” when said alone, do not constitute bids for attention. They are coded as TA because there is no meaningful verb phrase.
16. When “bid for attention” words occur in a series without a 2 second pause between them, they are coded as one Indirect Command.
17. In sentences containing two or more verbs in imperative form that are joined by “and,” if the sentence begins with a phrase that changes the meaning of the first “Direct Command” to an Indirect Command, it also makes the second command indirect unless the second command has a clear inflection and pause indicating that the “and” starts a new sentence.
18. In sentences containing two or more verbs in imperative form that are joined by “and,” where one verb phrase does not contain independent meaning, only one command is coded.
19. In sentences that contain two or more verb phrases in imperative form joined by “and,” but the verb phrases refer to a single child behavior, the first verb phrase is a command with opportunity and the remaining verb phrase(s) is a command with no opportunity.
20. Some conditional statements and questions are Indirect Commands.
c. If a conditional statement refers to an ongoing behavior of the child or to behavior the child may initiate in the future, and specifies a contingent reward from the parent for continuing or initiating the behavior, the statement is an Indirect Command.
d. If a conditional statement specifies a parent-imposed conventional negative consequence that will follow if the child fails to initiate or continue a behavior, the statement is an Indirect Command (unless the statement is a “Warning” (see Appendix).
e. In all conditional statements, if the statement regarding the child's behavior contains elements
of more than one DPICS category, the priority order for coding categories is used.

PRAISE 
Praise is a verbalization expressing a favorable judgment of an attribute, product, or behavior of the child. There are two types of praise: Labeled and Unlabeled Praise. Labeled praise is intended to teach the child specifically what he or she can do to receive further parent approval. Unlabeled Praise does not necessarily reinforce behavior, but it may enhance a child's self-esteem.

LABELED PRAISE (LP)
Definition
Labeled praise provides a positive evaluation of a specific behavior, activity, or product of the child.

Decision rules
1. When uncertain whether a statement is Labeled or Unlabeled Praise, code it Unlabeled Praise.
2. When uncertain whether a statement is a Labeled Praise or falls within another category such as Reflective Statement, Descriptive Statement, Descriptive/Reflective Question, Direct Command, Indirect Command or Neutral Talk, do not code Labeled Praise.

Parent LP Guidelines
1. Labeled Praises must contain both the positive evaluation and the description of the specific action or product in one sentence to be coded as Labeled Praise.
2. Praises must include a positive evaluative word or phrase that describes the child or the child's behaviors, activities, or products.
a. Positive evaluative words include good and all of its synonyms. Other descriptive words that are considered in DPICS as positive evaluative words include pretty, intelligent, neat, polite, well-behaved, right, thoughtful, creative, careful, superior, brilliant, beautiful, perfect, wonderful, handsome, patient, bright, special, considerate, fun, enjoyable, first-rate, top- notch, marvelous, nifty, neato, awesome, cool, imaginative, creative, and their synonyms.
b. Descriptive words not considered sufficiently positive to constitute a praise include quiet, fast, slow, alert, funny, interesting, strong, silly, exciting, energetic, straight, fine, okay, alright, fancy and their synonyms.
3. The positive evaluative component of a Labeled Praise may be a metaphor.
4. Verbalizations that clearly express the parent's appreciation or pleasure about a specific action
or product of the child are Labeled Praise of the child.
5. The positive evaluative component must refer to a specific behavior of the child or the specific product resulting from the child's behavior.
a. A Labeled Praise may provide an evaluation of the child's specific behavior.
b. A Labeled Praise may provide an evaluation of the child's specific product.
c. Praises describing mental or physical attributes of the child that include a description of the specific behavior or products related to these attributes are Labeled Praises.
6. Statements that equate the child with a noun are praises when the noun is modified by a positive evaluative word. These praises are labeled when the noun refers to behavior that is ongoing or immediately completed by the child.
7. When praises contain nonspecific verbs like “working,” “playing,” “acting,” and their synonyms, the verbs must be modified by a word or a phrase describing the action in order to be coded a Labeled Praise.
8. Praises containing nonspecific nouns such as job, idea, work, and their synonyms are Labeled Praises only when these nouns are qualified by verbs or verb phrases describing more specific behavior.
9. Parental expressions of praise for joint activities or products created by the dyad are coded as praise of child.
10. If a statement contains two or more meaningful verb phrases describing clearly independent child behaviors and at least one positive evaluative word or phrase that modifies the verbs, each modified verb phrase is coded as a separate praise.
11. Specific positive evaluative statements of the child's behavior or products are Labeled Praises even if they are stated in question form. (Refer to priority order.)
12. Labeled praises that reflect the child's statements or answer the child's questions are coded as Labeled Praise rather than reflections or descriptions. (Refer to priority order.)
13. Commands with opportunity to comply that contain Labeled Praise of the child remain commands. Commands automatically coded no opportunity that contain praise, are coded as praise.
14. Descriptions of actual behavior, rather than its quality, no matter how positive the behavior or how enthusiastically it is described, are not praise.
15. A statement that interprets the child's positive feelings about his or her behavior (but does not provide the parent's evaluation) is a Descriptive Statement rather than a Labeled Praise.
16. Praises of objects that are not a product of the child are coded as Neutral Talks.
17. Praise must provide the parent's evaluation. When the parent attributes praise of the child to someone or something outside the dyad, code Neutral Talk.
18. Certain words that typically provide positive evaluation may change meaning when modifying non-evaluative adjectives that describe the child's behavior, activity, or products. Those words do not make the verbalization a praise.
19. Neutral Talk in the form of a conditional statement become Labeled Praise if it contains a positive evaluation of the child's specific behavior, activity, or product.
20. When a parent gives a praise “in role” during pretend play, the statement is coded as praise.

UNLABELED PRAISE (UP)
Definition
An Unlabeled Praise provides a positive evaluation of the child, an attribute of the child, or a nonspecific activity, behavior, or product of the child.

Decision rules
1. When uncertain as to whether a statement is a labeled or Unlabeled Praise, code Unlabeled Praise.
2. When uncertain as to whether a statement is an Unlabeled Praise or falls within another code category such as Reflective Statement, Behavior Descriptions, Questions, or Neutral Talk, do not code Unlabeled Praise.


Parent UP Guidelines
1. A verbalization that contains positive evaluative words or phrases but does not indicate the specific behavior, activity, or product of the child being evaluated is an Unlabeled Praise of child.
2. Praises must include a positive evaluative word or phrase that describes the child or the child's behaviors, attributes, activities, or products.
a. Positive evaluative words include good and all of its synonyms. Other descriptive words that are considered in DPICS as positive evaluative words include pretty, nice, intelligent, neat, polite, well-behaved, right, thoughtful, careful, superior, brilliant, beautiful, perfect, wonderful, handsome, patient, bright, special, considerate, fun, enjoyable, first-rate, top-
notch, marvelous, nifty, neato, awesome, cool,
and their synonyms.
b. Descriptive words not considered sufficiently positive to constitute a praise include quiet, fast, slow, alert, funny, interesting, strong, silly, exciting, energetic, straight, fancy, and their synonyms.
3. Positively evaluative adverbs or adjectives describing or implying that the child's unspecified behavior is “good,” “better,” or “best” are Unlabeled Praise of child.
4. Verbalizations that express the parent's appreciation or pleasure about a nonspecific or unstated action or product of the child are Unlabeled Praise of the child.
5. Descriptions of the child in terms of a positive metaphor commonly used to express approval are Unlabeled Praise.
6. Certain phrases of Neutral Talk are commonly used to express approval and positive evaluation of the child's activities, products or attributes. These idiomatic expressions are coded Unlabeled Praise, not Neutral Talk. The expressions, “There you go,” “Alright,” and “Yes,” are also considered expressions of praise when, and only when, accompanied by nonverbal gestures clearly indicating approval (e.g., smiles, claps, Positive Touches).
7. Praises that describe physical or mental attributes of the child but do not describe specific behavior or products related to these attributes are Unlabeled Praises.
8. Statements that equate the child with a noun are praises when the noun is modified by a positive evaluative word. These praises are unlabeled when the noun refers to behavior that is not ongoing or immediately completed by the child.
9. Even though the parent specifically describes the child's behavior in a separate sentence following an Unlabeled Praise of the behavior, this does not make the Unlabeled Praise labeled.
10. An Unlabeled Praise referring to joint activities, products, or attributes of the dyad, are coded as Unlabeled Praise of the child.
11. If a statement contains two or more meaningful verb phrases describing clearly independent child behaviors, and at least one positive evaluative word or phrase that modifies the verbs, each modified verb phrase is coded as a separate praise.
12. Nonspecific verbalizations that positively evaluate the child’s activity, products, or attributes are Unlabeled Praise even if they are stated as questions.
13. When a child asks a Descriptive/Reflective Question requesting an evaluative response, an affirmative response that would otherwise be Neutral Talk is coded an Unlabeled Praise.
14. When a child expresses a positive self-evaluation, an affirmative response that would otherwise be Neutral Talk is coded an Unlabeled Praise.
15. A statement that interprets the child's feeling state is Neutral Talk, not an Unlabeled Praise.
16. Neutral Talk that expresses positive evaluation of an object or event not created by the child is Neutral Talk, not praise.
17. Certain words that typically provide positive evaluation may change meaning when modifying non-evaluative adjectives describing the child's behavior, activity, or product. These words do not make the verbalization a praise.
18. When a parent makes a praise “in role” during pretend play, the statement is coded praise.

QUESTIONS

Questions are verbal inquiries from one person to another that are distinguishable from declarative statements by having a rising inflection at the end and/or by having the sentence structure of a question. Questions request an answer but do not suggest that a behavior is to be performed by the other person. There are two types of questions: descriptive/reflective and Information Questions. Information Questions request a verbal response beyond a Neutral Talk while Descriptive/Reflective Questions request no more than a Neutral Talk in response.
INFORMATION QUESTIONS (IQ)
Definition
Questions that request specific information from the child other than a brief response (e.g., yes, no, maybe) are Information Questions, even if the child gives a brief response (e.g., “dunno”) or no response at all.

Decision rules
1. When uncertain whether a verbalization is a Descriptive/Reflective Question or an Information Question, code Descriptive/Reflective Question.
2. When uncertain whether a statement is an Indirect Command or an Information Question, code Information Question.
3. When uncertain whether a statement is a Descriptive Statement, a Reflective Statement, or an Information Question, code Descriptive Statement or Reflective Statement.
4. When uncertain whether a question is a praise, Negative Talk, or Information Question, code Information Question.

Parent IQ Guidelines
1. An Information Question may be distinguished from a Descriptive/Reflective Question (DQ) by the type of response expected from the child.
a. Information Questions ask for information beyond a simple response such as “yes” or “no.”. When questions ask for only an affirmative or negative response from the child, they are coded Descriptive/Reflective Question.
b. The responses to both Information Questions and Descriptive/Reflective Questions may be communicated nonverbally, but the distinction between Information Question and Descriptive/Reflective Question still depends on whether the content of the expected response exceeds a simple affirmative or negative response (e.g., “yes” or “no”).
2. An Information Question may be distinguished from a Descriptive/Reflective Question by the form of the question.
a. Open-ended questions are usually Information Questions. Closed-ended questions are usually Descriptive/Reflective Questions.
b. Rhetorical questions can be Information Questions or Descriptive/Reflective Questions depending on whether the question is open-ended or closed-ended.
3. Information Questions request that the child provide information whereas Indirect Commands contain a specific command for a verbal or motor behavioral response.
4. When a parent repeats a child's Information Question, where the meaning may change depending on the parent's inflection, code Information Question if the intended meaning of the question requests more than a simple affirmative or negative response (e.g., “yes” or “no”) in response.
5. If “Huh?” or one of its synonyms is stated within 2 seconds following an Information Question, it is not coded separately from the original question. If “Huh?” follows sequentially (i.e., no intervening verbalizations by parent or child) and by more than 2 seconds after an Information Question, it serves to repeat the question and is coded as a separate Information Question.
6. The word “Huh” or one of its synonyms is an Information Question when its meaning is “What did you say?”.
7. Information Questions contain no praise or criticism of the child or the child's products or activities.
a. When the questions include praise of the child or the child's products or activities, code the appropriate praise category.
b. When the parent's question includes criticism of the child or the child's products or activities, code Negative Talk.
c. When the parent's question contains evaluative references to both the parent and child, references to the child take precedence.
d. When a parent's question includes praise or criticism of some aspect of the play situation (e.g., objects, activities, ideas) that is not owned or created by the child, it is coded the appropriate question category.
8. Single word Information Questions repeated less than 2 seconds apart are coded as 1 Information Question.
9. Multiple word Information Questions repeated less than 2 seconds apart are coded as separate questions and the response to the first question is coded as no opportunity to answer.

DESCRIPTIVE/REFLECTIVE QUESTIONS (DQ)
Definition
A Descriptive/Reflective Question is a descriptive or reflective comment or statement expressed in question form which requires no more than a brief affirmative or negative response (e.g., “yes” or “no”), even if the child gives additional information in response or does not respond.

Decision rules
1. When uncertain as to whether a verbalization is a Descriptive/Reflective Question or an Information Question, code Descriptive/Reflective Question.
2. When uncertain as to whether a question is an Indirect Command or Descriptive/Reflective Question, code Descriptive/Reflective Question.
3. When uncertain as to whether a statement is a Descriptive Statement, a Reflective Statement, or a Descriptive/Reflective Question, code Descriptive Statement or Reflective Statement.

Parent DQ Guidelines
1. Some Descriptive Statements, Reflective Statements, and Neutral Talk become Descriptive/Reflective Questions by inflection; the voice rises rather than falls at the end of the sentence.
2. Some Descriptive Statements, Reflective Statements, and Neutral Talk become Descriptive/Reflective Questions by the addition of a question tag at the end of the sentence.
3. A Descriptive/Reflective Question is distinguished from an Information Question by the form of the question.
a. Open-ended questions which request information beyond a brief affirmative or negative response (e.g., “yes” or “no”) are Information Questions. Closed-ended questions are Descriptive/Reflective Questions.
b. Rhetorical questions, to which an answer is not expected, can be either Descriptive/Reflective Questions or Information Questions depending on whether the question is open or closed-ended.
4. A Descriptive/Reflective Question may be distinguished from an Information Question (IQ) by the type of response expected from the child.
a. Descriptive/Reflective Questions ask for no more than a brief affirmative or negative response (e.g., “yes” or “no”) from the child. When questions ask for information beyond a brief affirmative or negative response (e.g., “yes” or “no”), they are coded Information Questions, even if the child responds with a brief answer or does not respond.
b. The responses to both Descriptive/Reflective Questions and Information Questions may be communicated nonverbally, but the distinction between Descriptive/Reflective Questions and Information Questions still depends on whether the expected content in the response exceeds a brief affirmative or negative response (e.g., “yes” or “no”).
5. When a parent repeats a child's Information Question, where the meaning may change depending on the parent's inflection, code Descriptive/Reflective Question if the intended meaning of the question requires no more than a brief affirmative or negative response (e.g., “yes” or “no”) in response.
6. When a parent repeats a child's Descriptive/Reflective Question, the repetition is always a Descriptive/Reflective Question, regardless of meaning, because the answer requires no more than a brief affirmative or negative response (e.g., “yes” or “no”).
7. Descriptive/Reflective Questions request no more than a brief affirmative or negative verbal response (e.g., “yes” or “no”) whereas Indirect Commands suggest a specific vocal or motor response to be performed by the child.
8. Questions about the child's feelings, opinions, or preferences that contain two or more choices for the child to select are coded as Information Questions.
9. Because it is difficult to distinguish Descriptive/Reflective Questions from questions that may be intended by the parent to be Indirect Commands, questions beginning with “Do you know...,” “Do you want...,’’ “Do you remember...,’’ and “Are you going to...” are automatically coded as Descriptive/Reflective Questions.
10. Because it is difficult to distinguish between Indirect Commands and questions, questions beginning with “Can you...” are coded as Indirect Commands regardless of other possible intended meanings.
11. If “Huh?” or its synonyms is stated within 2 seconds of a Descriptive/Reflective Question, it is not coded separately from the original question. If “Huh?” follows sequentially (i.e., no intervening verbalizations by parent or child) and by more than 2 seconds after a Descriptive/Reflective Question, it serves to repeat the question and is coded as a separate Descriptive/Reflective Question.
12. Descriptive/Reflective Questions contain no praise or criticism of the child, the child's products or activities.
a. When the questions include praise of the child or the child’s products or activities, code the appropriate praise category. When the questions contain criticism of a person other than the child, code the appropriate question category.
b. When the questions include criticism of the child or the child's products or activities, code the appropriate Negative Talk category. When the questions contain criticism of a person other than the child, code the appropriate question category.
c. When the parent's questions contain evaluative references to both the parent and child, references to the child take precedence.
f. When a question includes praise or criticism of some aspect of the 'play-situation (e.g., objects, activities, ideas) that is not owned or created by the child, it is coded the appropriate question category.

REFLECTIVE STATEMENT (RF)
Definition
A Reflective Statement by the parent is a declarative phrase or statement that has the same meaning child verbalization. The reflection may paraphrase or elaborate upon the child’s verbalization but may not change the meaning of the child’s statement or interpret unstated ideas.

Decision rules
1. When uncertain as to whether a statement is a Reflective Statement or a Labeled Praise, Unlabeled Praise, Negative Talk, Direct Command, or Descriptive/Reflective Question, code Reflective Statement.
2. When uncertain as to whether a statement is a Descriptive Statement, Neutral Talk, or a Reflective Statement, do not code Reflective Statement.

Parent RF Guidelines
1. A Reflective Statement is a parental repetition or restatement of a child's verbalization.
2. The Reflective Statement must retain the verbal content of the child's verbalization by including at least some of the child's words or exact synonyms of the child's words.
3. The Reflective Statement must retain the basic meaning of the child's statement.
a. Restated descriptions that change the meaning by referring to the other person or the activity of the other person are descriptions rather than Reflective Statements.
b. Rephrased statements that change the child's intent or contradict the child are not coded as Reflective Statements.
4. The Reflective Statement may contain a descriptive elaboration or a grammatical correction of the child's message as long as the original meaning is retained.
5. A Reflective Statement may reflect the child's stated feeling content but does not interpret unstated feelings of the child.
6. Reflective Statements by the parent contain no praise or criticism of the child.
7. If a child issues more than one verbalization uninterrupted by parent talk, the parent's restatement of any of these child verbalizations can be coded as a Reflective Statement.
8. A Reflective Statement by the parent must be the first parent verbalization following the child's verbalization with the exception of Acknowledgments and Unlabeled Praises. A brief Neutral Talk or Unlabeled Praise (generally no more than one word) by the parent may precede the Reflective Statement.
9. When a parental restatement of a child verbalization is preceded by any parental verbalization other than a Neutral Talk or Unlabeled Praise, the restatement is not coded as a Reflective Statement.
10. If a parent restates a child's verbalization more than once, only the first restatement is coded a Reflective Statement. Any subsequent restatement of the child's verbalization is not coded as a reflection and is coded the appropriate verbalization category.
11. A repetition of a single word or a phrase from a child's preceding statement, which often serves to indicate that the parent heard the verbalization, may be a Reflective Statement if it does not change the meaning of the child's verbalization.
12. Sentence fragments that have no meaning are not reflections even if they contain words or phrases from a previous child verbalization.
13. Parental repetitions of meaningful words or phrases from a child's preceding question are coded as Reflective Statements if they do not become questions and simply indicate that the question was heard.
14. Repetitions of a child's question, which become questions for the child to answer, are not Reflective Statements.
15. Answers to a child's questions are not Reflective Statements.
16. A parent’s repetition of a child's description or suggestion for a future activity is a command, not a Reflective Statement, when the repetition is directing the child to do something.
17. Parental compliance to child commands for verbal behavior are not Reflective Statements.
18. A Reflective Statement must be in declarative rather than in question form. When a parent repeats a child's verbalization in a question form (i.e., using a question tag or a questioning inflection), the parent's question is coded as a Descriptive/Reflective Question.
19. Negative talk responses to a child's verbalization are not reflections.
20. When the parent restates what the child has said ”in role” during pretend play, code Reflective Statement.

BEHAVIORAL DESCRIPTIONS (BD)
Definition
Behavioral Descriptions are non-evaluative, declarative sentences or phrases in which the subject is the other person and the verb describes that person's ongoing or immediately completed (< 5 sec.) observable verbal or nonverbal behavior.

Decision rules
1. When uncertain whether the verbalization is a Descriptive Statement, Reflective Statement, question, command, question, praise, or Negative Talk, code Descriptive Statement.
2. When uncertain as to whether a statement is a Descriptive Statement or a Neutral Talk, code Neutral Talk.
3. When uncertain as to whether a description is a Behavioral Description or a Neutral Talk, code Neutral Talk.

Parent BD Guidelines
1. Behavioral Descriptions can be distinguished from Neutral Talks by the subject of the sentence which must be the child. In a Neutral Talk, the subject may be the child, but can also be other objects or people.
2. The subject of the sentence in a Behavioral Description is always the child. In speaking, parents may omit the word “you” but the subject (i.e., the child) can usually be inferred from the context, the parent's inflection, or the verb tense.
3. Behavioral Descriptions can be distinguished from Neutral Talks by their content. Behavioral Descriptions use action verbs to describe actual observable child behavior and do not interpret thoughts, motivations, feelings, or events. Verbs that are not considered action verbs include “got, ” “have, ” “want, ” “know, ” “are,” “decide,” and “try to decide.”
4. Noncritical statements that describe what the child is not doing are coded as Neutral Talk, not Behavioral Descriptions.
5. Behavioral Descriptions can be distinguished from Neutral Talk by the time frame. A Behavioral Description gives only an account of the child's current or immediately completed behavior. Descriptions of past (more than 5-seconds) or future behaviors are not Behavioral Descriptions.
6. A parent's Behavioral Description may be prompted by the child's verbal behavior.
7. When the subject of a parent's description is both the parent and the child, it is coded Behavioral Description.
8. When the parent elaborates on a meaningful Behavioral Description with words or phrases not containing verbs, the elaboration is coded as a separate verbalization only if it is separated by a pause of 2 seconds or more and contains independent meaning.
9. When a statement contains two or more complete descriptions (i.e., each description having a subject and a verb) joined by “and” or “but,” code each sentence separately. Complete Behavioral Descriptions must include a verb phrase describing the child's ongoing or immediately completed behavior, but do not require an explicitly stated subject.
a. When a statement contains two or more complete descriptions (i.e., each having a verb phrase) joined by “and” or “but,” code each description separately.
b. When a parent lists a series of verb phrases that are not connected by ”and” or “but,” each verb phrase is coded as a separate sentence regardless of pauses.
c. When a parent issues a series of descriptive phrases, an action verb must be present that describes the child’s ongoing or immediately completed behavior for the phrase to be a behavioral description. Without the verb, the phrase is Neutral Talk.
10. Statements beginning with “You can...” are Behavioral Descriptions only when the child has already begun to perform the behavior described by the parent in the “You can...” statement. Statements beginning with “You can...” are Neutral Talks when the statement is in response to the child's request for permission or for a specific suggestion about what to do. Statements beginning with “You can...” are Indirect Commands only when the child has not sought direction and the child has not actually begun to perform the behavior.
11. Statements beginning with “You are going to...” are coded as Behavioral Descriptions only when the child has already initiated the behavior being described in the statement and when the statement does not contain a specific suggestion for a new or different behavior to be performed by the child.
12. When a parent makes a Behavioral Description “in role” during pretend play with toy characters, the statement is coded Behavioral Description.

NEUTRAL TALK (TA)
Definition
Neutral talk is comprised of statements that introduce information about people, objects, events, or activities, or indicate attention to the child, but do not clearly describe or evaluate the child's current or immediately completed behavior.

Decision rules
1. When uncertain whether the verbalization is Neutral Talk or any other verbalization category, code Neutral Talk.
2. When uncertain whether a statement is a Behavioral Description or Neutral Talk, code Neutral Talk.
3. When uncertain whether Neutral Talk words strung together are one sentence or separate sentences, code one sentence.

Parent TA Guidelines
1. Neutral Talk may give an account of:
a. the parent's independent behavior
b. toys, objects, people, and activities
c. feelings or motivations
d. general comments that do not describe the child's behavior
2. Neutral Talk can be distinguished from Behavioral Description by the subject of the sentence. Although the subject of Neutral Talk may be the child, when the subject of a Descriptive Statement is other than the child, it is always a Neutral Talk.
3. When the subject of the Descriptive Statement is the child, the statement can only be Neutral Talk if it does not use action verbs to describe the child's behavior. Neutral Talk uses state-of- being verbs to describe thoughts, feelings, motivations, or facts.
4. Neutral Talk may be distinguished from Behavioral Description by the time frame. Description of past behavior (> 5 sec.) is Neutral Talk, in contrast to Behavioral Description which gives only an account of the child's current or immediately completed behavior.
5. Noncritical statements that describe what the child is not doing are coded as Neutral Talk, not Behavioral Descriptions.
6. Neutral Talk does not contain orders or demands.
a. The generic use of “you” meaning “one” or “people” when providing information should not be confused with the “you” referring to a child in a command.
b. A permission statement beginning with “You can...,” “You might...,” “You could...... or “You may...” and following a request for that permission is Neutral Talk. If a parent offers an unsolicited permission statement suggesting a specific behavior the child is to perform, it is an Indirect Command.
c. Statements about future behaviors are Neutral Talk when they describe what will likely happen to the child in the future. They are commands when they directly instruct the child to perform a future behavior.
7. Statements that provide general rules for appropriate behavior can be Neutral Talk, Indirect Commands, or Negative Talk.
a. A positively-worded statement that describes a rule about appropriate behavior in general, but does not imply that the child's ongoing or just-completed behavior should be performed differently in the future, is coded Neutral Talk.
b. A negatively-worded statement (i.e., tells the child what not to do) that describes a rule about appropriate behavior in general and that does not criticize the child's ongoing or immediately completed behavior is coded Neutral Talk.
8. Some parent statements may implicitly direct the child by providing information; however, code command only when the statement contains an action verb calling for a vocal or motor behavior to be performed by the child.
9. Neutral Talk contains no praise or criticism of the child's products or activities.
a. Certain Neutral Talk phrases are commonly used to express approval and positive evaluation of the child's activities, products or attributes. These idiomatic expressions are coded Unlabeled Praise. The expressions, “There you go,” “Alright,” and “Yes,” are considered expressions of Unlabeled Praise only when accompanied by nonverbal gestures clearly indicating approval (e.g., smiles, claps, Positive Touches).
b. When the statements include criticism of the child, code Negative Talk. When the statements contain criticism of a person other than the child, code Neutral Talk.
c. When a statement includes praise or criticism of some aspect of the play situation (e.g., objects, activities, ideas) that is not owned or created by either person, it is coded as Neutral Talk.
d. Certain phrases of Neutral Talk are commonly used to express disapproval and negative evaluation of the child’s activities, products or attributes. These expressions (e.g., “darn, “yuck,” “ick”) are coded Negative Talk, not Neutral Talk.
10. When a child's Prosocial Talk is repeated by the parent using the same or synonymous words, the parent's statement is Neutral Talk only when it changes the meaning of the child's statement.
11. When Neutral Talk statements are strung together and the end of a particular sentence is unclear, it is necessary to distinguish separate statements by attending to the thought being conveyed.
a. Each conceptually self-contained thought is given one Neutral Talk code.
b. Meaningful descriptions strung together but separated by a pause of 2 seconds or more are coded as separate sentences. Sentence fragments with no meaning are not coded.
12. When a parent issues a series of neutral statements, an action verb must be present that describes the child's ongoing or immediately completed behavior for the phrase to be a Behavioral Description. When the verb is absent, the phrase is coded Neutral Talk.
13. Some conditional statements are Neutral Talk. Also see Appendix A for general guidelines for coding conditional statements.
a. If a conditional statement specifies a natural consequence or a neutral parent response that is likely to occur as a result of the child's behavior, the statement is a Neutral Talk.
b. If a conditional statement refers to a contingent reward from the parent that will follow if the child doesn't initiate an aversive behavior, code Neutral Talk.
c. If a conditional statement indicates the parent-imposed conventional negative consequence that will follow if the child initiates an aversive behavior, code Neutral Talk.
d. In any conditional statement, if the statement regarding the child's behavior contains elements of more than one DPICS category, the priority order for coding categories is used.
14. Neutral Talk includes brief responses indicating to the child that the parent is watching or listening to them.
15. Neutral Talk includes exclamations of surprise that carry no information beyond the element of surprise. Neutral Talk does not necessarily contain intelligible content (i.e., it may be nonsense words commonly used to express surprise, such as “oops”).
16. Neutral Talk includes “automatically given” social phrases that do not actually describe, reflect, praise, or direct the child's behavior.
17. When a child asks a Question requesting agreement or disagreement with a positive or negative self-evaluation, the parental response may contain implicit praise or criticism, which would then be coded as Labeled Praise, Unlabeled Praise, or Negative Talk.
18. When Neutral Talk is stated sarcastically, they are coded Negative Talk.
19. Phrases of Neutral Talk stated with questioning inflection are coded as Descriptive/Reflective Questions.
20. The word “no” is sometimes coded Neutral Talk depending on the preceding child behavior or verbalization.
a. When the child issues a statement or question expressing a feeling, wish, or other internal state and the parent responds to the child’s verbalization with “No” or its synonyms, the “No” is coded Neutral Talk.
b. When a parent uses the word “No” or its synonyms to indicate that a preceding statement by the child is incorrect, the word “No” or its synonyms is coded as Negative Talk rather than Neutral Talk, unless the parent is contradicting a negative child self-statement.
c. When a parent responds to a child's command by saying “No” or its synonyms followed in less than 2 seconds by another verbalization, the word “No” or its synonyms is not coded. The word “No” or its synonyms is coded as a Negative Talk when the parent responds to a child's command with a flat refusal (i.e., by saying “No” or its synonyms and issuing no additional verbalizations for 2 seconds).
NOTE: When a child responds to a parental command with “No” or its synonyms, it is always coded as a Negative Talk regardless of subsequent compliance or other verbalizations by the child.
21. Words that have no distinct meaning other than to introduce a sentence are not coded separately.
22. When a Neutral Talk follows a complete sentence by the parent in which the subject or focus of the sentence is the child, code Neutral Talk. When the subject of the preceding sentence is other than the child, do not code Neutral Talk.
23. A verbalization cannot be simultaneously coded as Neutral Talk and any other verbalization category.
24. When acknowledgments accompany a physical behavior (i.e., Positive Touch, Negative Touch), both Neutral Talk and the physical behaviors are coded.
